[Music]
there is so much to talk about as usual
like I don't know how we're gonna get
through all of this it's a good job that
I'm still on a massive high from my CERN
trip this week well done to all of you
who guessed right and that's where I was
going there will be videos coming very
soon
from that trip which I am really excited
about but before that we should get into
recapping what's happened in space news
this month including the fact that we
think the solar system might have formed
differently and another fast radio
bursts that's put the cat amongst the
pigeons a little bit with theories of
explaining what they are all the time
stamps are in the description if you
want to skip ahead but first let's start
by looking up at what we can see in the
night sky in the coming month so the
last week of February from the sort of
late the 24th of February coming out of
its new moon phase and it's gonna look
like well a toenail and so what I like
to say that it looks like when it comes
out of that phase and essentially what
it will be doing is setting later and
way to each night it's gonna be really
close to Venus in the last week of
February so on the 24th it's gonna be
below Venus and by the 27th it will have
moved above Venus looks to the west
after sunset to try and spot this I know
that there's gonna be so many pictures
sent my way of the super-bright Venus
with the beautiful toenail moon next to
it and I can't wait to see them all as
we get into March and closer to the
equinox where you have equal day and
equal night due to the Earth's axis tilt
that causes our seasons we need to start
thinking about spotting the zodiacal
light in the sky so if you remember from
a previous video I did the zodiacal
light is a glow in the night sky off the
dust that's in our solar system plane so
this is what Brian May the guitarist of
Queen did his astrophysics thesis on and
I did a big recap of that in previous
video so check that out if you're
interested but now is around about the
right time to spot it because at the
equinox the plane of the solar system is
sort of perpendicular to the horizon so
it makes it a lot easier to spot now you
are going to need
very dark sky to be able to spot this so
if you're a city dweller I'm sorry but
you've got no chance you need a very
rural sky and preferably one without a
moon so this is why the 10th of March is
actually the best chance for you to be
able to spot this if you're in the
northern hemisphere the 10th of March is
the closest time we can get to the
equinox and in the evening sky just
after sunset when this is going to be
visible sort of between like an hour and
a half to two hours after sunset we're
not gonna have the moon in the sky at
that time it won't risen yet in the
southern hemisphere however instead of
looking for it after sunset you should
look for it before sunrise again sort of
two hours to an hour and a half before
sunrise but look to the east not the
west and again what you want is a
morning sky without the moon near the
equinoxes probably actually have to wait
till more like the 23rd of March to be
able to spot this so sorry you have to
wait a little bit longer but hopefully
anybody who has access to a very dark
rural sky at around March time around
the equinox you should have a pretty
good chance of spotting it on the 15th
of March we have a quarter moon in the
east just before sunrise and it's going
to be very near three planets Jupiter
Mars and Saturn they're all gonna be
clustered quite tightly together in a
very similar place in the night sky and
the side of the Moon that's actually the
thought would be the direction you can
look to find the planets along the line
in the sky that the Sun takes the planet
takes the plane of the solar system that
we call the ecliptic that goes through
all the zodiac constellations now if you
look for that about an hour before
sunrise which is actually gonna be
pretty early in March for the clocks
won't have gone forward at least in the
UK by this time I think they've gone
forward in the US by that time but
sunrise in the UK is still it's six
o'clock then so you have to be looking
around about 5:00 to be able to spot
this as it gets closer to the sunrise
and to dawn though mercury should also
pop up above the horizon you will need a
very low horizon to be able to spot that
nothing in the way and as mercury rises
it
might be a little bit too bright the sky
to then be able to spot Saturn and Mars
which aren't as bright as they Jupiter
and Mercury very close to the Sun so
you'd probably struggle at seeing all
four planets at the same time in the sky
but if you get up early enough and you
can sort of see the transition of the
sky lightning as the dawn comes you
should be able to spot all four of them
if you've got a nice clear horizon to do
that all right that's enough for looking
at let's recap all the space news that's
happened in the past month
all right first up we need like a
mission recap this month because so much
has happened
first of all nasa's spitzer space
telescope was retired on january 31st
after 16 years of service it was only
designed to last two and a half years
and with some clever engineering folks
at nasa managed to make it last much
longer than that it really was the end
of an era this was NASA's infrared
telescope we need infrared telescopes to
be able to see through the dust in our
galaxy so Spitzer was used to literally
see to the center of the Milky Way it
was used to see into star forming
regions that are shrouded by dust it was
also used to detect exoplanets most
famously the seven planet system of
Trappist one and infrared observations
is not something we can do from the
ground we need space telescopes to see
this because unfortunately our
atmosphere absorbs infrared and so
astronomers are now clamoring for a new
infrared telescope and that should come
with the launch of the James Webb Space
Telescope which is scheduled for March
2021 and that is still the official word
from NASA but I'm hearing a fair few
rumors from people who work on the
mission that that could be put back to
July 2021 which is another delay that
James Webb Space Telescope does not need
we did see the launch of ESA's solar
orbiter probe this month though on
February 9th from Cape Canaveral in
Florida and this is a really exciting
mission to study the Sun now I won't get
into what's called operational orbit for
about two years it'll take two years to
get there but when it does it's actually
gonna be in orbit around the poles about
so much it's a really interesting region
that we've not really been able to study
before it will combine with NASA's
Parker Solar Probe to cover lots of
different areas the Sun simultaneously
so we can learn more about how the Sun
works and especially its mysterious
magnetic field speaking of the Sun
whilst we're waiting for those solar
probes to make it into orbit around the
Sun the Daniel K in newest solar
telescope and her
Kalaa Maui took its first-ever image
this month of the surface of the Sun it
took a fair few and made a little movie
of it and what you can see are these
incredible because solar cells on the
Sun which you can kind of think of sort
of like plasma convection cells where
you've got lots of heat rising from the
interior of the Sun cooling and falling
back down again and what's wonderful is
it almost looks like the surface of the
Sun is bubbling each of those bubbles is
about the size of France and this is the
most detailed picture of the Sun that
we've ever managed to take so I'm really
excited to see what will come from that
telescope on the ground in Hawaii and
how that's gonna combine with the park
of Solar Probe and Easter solar orbiter
in order for is to be able to sort of
figure out the Sun in the most
unprecedented detail in the future and
whilst we're here looking at pretty
pictures anyone see that picture that
China released from the surface of the
Moon taken by its changhie for mission
this month I don't think I'll ever get
tired of looking at pictures of moon
it's just so eerie an alien like so much
more alien than say pictures of the
surface of Mars because Mars still has
an atmosphere and the rock is sort of
similar to what we see on earth in
desert climes anyway whereas the moon
with no atmosphere and this really
barren grade rock just looks so alien
all the time to me and I could just I
could just stare at this image all day
now we're moving out of the era of
individual countries government-funded
space agencies launching missions into
space now and we're moving into the
commercial era of space and with it
we've had the launch of the beginnings
of space X's star light mega
constellation of satellites this is
their goal to provide internet for the
global population across the world which
is a fantastic goal to strive for but
currently there are 8,000 satellites in
orbit around Earth give or take a few
hundred anything from sort of
where the satellites TV satellites
education military etc some space junk
as well and with even those 8,000
satellites if you're at an observatory a
professional Observatory with these huge
big telescopes you're pretty much
guaranteed that at some point in the
night one of the images you're taking of
some tiny tiny patch of sky that say you
know less than a percent of the size of
the full moon you are gonna have a
satellite the streaks across your image
and you just have to sort of hope and
keep your fingers crossed that that
satellite trail won't go over the very
thing that you're trying to observe now
if that thing doesn't really change then
okay you could do that observation again
but say you're an astronomer who's very
interested in the variability of stars
or black holes or x-ray binaries or some
exotic object that varies on very small
timescales maybe even exoplanets as well
then that satellite trail could
completely ruin that observation so it's
a big deal and sometimes you just have
to say okay well it was sods law that
the satellite went over at that time but
there's only 8000 or so so it can kind
of be mitigated even though you're
guaranteed at least one a night StarLink
you're gonna take that from 8,000
satellites in orbit to 48,000 satellites
compare that with the 9000 stars that
are visible to the naked eye from the
darkest region of the planet where
you've got a dark sky site with no light
pollution you're vastly gonna outnumber
the number of visible stars that there
are so that raises two problems for
astronomers number one just the rights
of the public the general global
population to have their night sky
unspoiled by satellite streaks that you
will be able to see at nighttime then
you've also got the impact to
professional observatories because the
majority of astronomical research is
done from ground-based observatories you
need the ground-based observatories to
conduct surveys at the sky to find the
objects that you then want to study in
Mordy
tell with Space Telescope's it is far
too expensive to do surveys in space
it's also not really practical either
and if you think about the brand-new
observatories that are currently being
built yes okay you've got the James Webb
Space Telescope going up soon but then
the majority are ground-based you've got
the European extremely large telescope
you've got the 30 meter telescope you've
then got the large synoptic survey
telescope recently renamed the Vera
Rubin Observatory they're all these
massive big ground-based telescopes
that are going to be looking at the sky
night after night after night and really
suffering from these satellite trails so
sharanam has opened the conversation
with SpaceX there was a paper published
this month outlining these concerns of
how ground-based astronomy is pivotal to
professional astronomy and our
understanding of the universe how so
many leaps forward and an understanding
have come from ground-based
observatories and laying out you know
how many satellites would be in orbit
how bright they would be in comparison
to the rest of stars in the night sky
and laying out very very clearly to both
SpaceX and the public as well in
addition there was a days conference
between SpaceX the Royal Astronomical
Society here in the UK and the American
Astronomical Society in the u.s. trying
to have this open constructive
conversation between them to try and
mitigate this problem before it's too
late to do anything especially since
since that happened at the beginning of
February we've had 34 more new
satellites put up this time by one Webb
who are also gonna have one of these
mega constellations of 650 or so
satellites so it's not like SpaceX are
the only ones trying to do this I've
spoken to a couple of different
colleagues that were there on the day
unfortunately I couldn't make that day's
conference which I was gutted about I
think it always am a different matter of
opinion on whether you thought that the
conversation was constructive or not I'm
really hoping that we can just come to a
compromise that allows that goal to
still be achieved of providing the world
with free internet wherever you are
globally because that is an incredible
thing to strive for but at the same time
not halting the progress of science and
our understanding of the universe and
also not robbing the public like
yourselves of their right to an
unblemished night sky now on to the
solar system and if we wind back 4.5
billion years until the beginning of the
solar system and we think about how
planets asteroid Comets objects in the
solar system formed the leading
hypothesis for the past couple of
decades is that lots of little clumps of
rock and matter started clumping
together and then they would collide
quite violently and that would probably
melt a lot of the rocks than it could
form into a sort of roughly spherical
shape and lots of collisions like that
would happen until you built up bigger
in bigger bodies that was called the
hierarchical formation model and the
crucial thing there was that though
collisions were violent enough to be
able to reshape the rock but 15 years
ago a new theory emerged from
simulations that showed that perhaps
those collisions weren't as violent as
we thought and that actually they were
much more gentle sort of a bumping in a
meeting of little planetesimals little
clumps of rock in the early solar system
and that was called the pebble accretion
model obviously simulations are great
they can tell us a lot if we plug in all
the laws of physics that we know but
obviously if we're making an assumption
we're missing something then perhaps you
know they couldn't be giving us
something that's realistic so how to
test which of those models the pebble
accretion or the hierarchical accretion
model were correct is quite difficult
you have to be able to probe some of the
leftover relics from that very early
days of the solar system now thankfully
they exist still out in the Kuiper belt
beyond the orbit of Pluto you have lots
of those little planetesimals rock that
are still floating about in the forms of
sort of lumps of asteroids and if you
remember the New Horizons spacecraft
after it went past Pluto did a flyby of
an object in the Kuiper belt called
ultimate tool back on new
Years Eve 2018 and we got the images 3-1
New Year's Day 2019 of this asteroid
that looked a little bit like a snowman
it was quite appropriate for getting it
packed on New Year's Day in the middle
of winter the northern hemisphere anyway
and the fact that it looked like a
snowman puzzled everybody because if you
had a violent collision of two objects
you should not have retained that
snowman shape you should have completely
obliterated the previous shapes of the
two objects that came together to
amalgamate and form a new one and so a
year later the scientists on the new
horizons team have managed to analyze
all of the data they got from that flyby
and they have published this month three
papers explaining what they have found
all of which presents evidence that in
favor of this pebble accretion model and
so now we actually think that our
understanding of how the solar system
and other systems out in our galaxy and
beyond in the rest of the universe have
formed and come together in a very
gentle process and in fact the scientist
who was responsible for publishing this
idea of the pebble accretion model 15
years ago he was a PhD student at the
time as well so it was very almost
braved to trust in his simulations that
much and not think always it just a bug
in the code that's causing these gentle
collisions he's now a professor
professor Andres johansson and my
favorite part about this story is that
he posted a picture showing how he was
celebrating this result from the New
Horizons mission sort of siding with his
theory of how things were happening in
the early solar system by having a pizza
and coke with his family now on to
everybody's favorite unsolved mystery in
astronomy right now and that is fast
radio bursts so way back in the early
days of the history of this channel when
I was still bringing out audio and focus
on a tiny camera very different to
focusing on the giant CCDs that used to
on massive telescopes I did a very
blurry video on these fast radio bursts
but a lot of you liked it because it
covered you know what is our best
understanding of these things now which
isn't a lot to be honest all we know is
that they
very short millisecond burst of radio
waves that we detect from outer space
outside of our own galaxy even and some
of them we see once and that's it
and some of them repeat as well which is
strange because as soon as we started
detecting these fast radio bursts in
2007 people thought they might have
something to do with a big cataclysmic
event like a like a supernova or a
gamma-ray burst something that's this
big one-off giant explosion of energy
that you might get this very very rapid
burst of radio waves but as soon as we
then found a repeating fast radio bursts
where you got these millisecond pulses
on repeat that put pay to that idea then
being this one-off big explosion event
like a supernova these repeating sources
though are completely random there's no
rhyme or reason to them there's no
pattern there's no periodicity you can't
predict when they will arrive next they
are completely completely random so
since 2007 we now have a handful of
these fast radio bursts but we're
getting more and more with this switch
on of this experiment chime in Canada
which is a radio telescope not like most
other radio telescopes you can't
actually turn it and point it at the
source that you want to it just sort of
scans the part of the sky that is
currently over the top of it so in a
sense it's like always listening so one
of the sources that the chime experiment
announced last year and was able to
triangulate back to a galaxy that was
quite nearby 500 million light years
away
nearby ish and astronomers timescales a
beautiful quite large spiral galaxy
they've actually found it when they
looked at all the archived data they
have from September 2018 to October 2019
then it actually had some periodicity to
it it repeated every 16 days or so
except the fact that you would find
bursts that came again at this random
unpredictable pattern in a four-day
chunk and then you'd go 12 days without
anything and then you'd have another
four-day chunk where again it would be
completely unpredictable you could
detect lots and lots of bursts in that
four-day period or you could detect one
or you could detect none then you have
another 12 day period of quietness
before you'd have another 40
where it would be completely random
again but you would detect some of these
fast radio bursts that's really put the
cat amongst the pigeons here because yes
okay it's still random and chaotic like
the ones that we've had before which
aren't really predictable but there's
this overarching sixteen day period to
it people aren't quite sure how to
explain now some people have suggested
that perhaps that whatever object does
give off fast radio bursts is perhaps in
orbit around another object and perhaps
when the other object blocks it is that
12-day period where we don't see
anything now 16-day orbit it's obviously
a very short orbits that we have very
energetic systems that might give us
some clues as to what could have formed
these fast radio bursts and could be
producing these fast radio bursts then
people have been suggesting perhaps that
whatever objects producing these fast
radio bursts is rotating and we're
seeing them sort of lighthouse style as
something like the pole of the object
passes across where it is in the sky and
so for that point in time we get the
sporadic fast radio bursts coming from
it but again that that's putting the
periodicity in this 16-day down to
either orbits or rotation it's not
actually to do with the thing that's
producing the fast radio bursts
unfortunately it doesn't really
necessarily give us any more clues as to
what it could be whether it could be
something to do with a magnetar list of
neutron stars it's huge
- it feels and we mean neutron stars or
black holes we don't really have any
ideas still but I think it's still
interesting to think about the fact that
these objects producing these fast radio
bursts could be in normal orbits around
other objects just like we see other
things in our universe that's it for
night sky news this month that keep a
lookout for the next episode of the
podcast I do with the Royal Astronomical
Society coming out next week I will link
it in a community post when it does come
out for you to hear it because I know a
lot of you like podcasts as well as
YouTube for listening on the go or on
the commute until next time where I
hopefully maybe have a CERN video
for you leave me a comment below and let
me know if you do spot any of the things
I talked about in the sky this month
maybe send me a picture on Twitter or
Instagram as well because as always I'd
love to see it
telescope has just started taking images
on how I color in what in Maui
I want to say more water then but I
started saying Maui the Daniel K in
newly solar telescope on Haleakala
malawi not malawi Maui sunny how you say
FRB rather than like how NASA is it you
say is a word like and rather than like
the na sa I'm gonna be fun to like fr
bees were actually called Ferb's if I
started calling them verbs with people I
meant probably not put that dream to bed
to lay - uh-huh uh-huh I mean everyone
knew that was going to be right